# Tokyo 2022

This repository will get updated as things develop, but for now I'll be just
adding some of my most important findings and words of caution.

## Table of Contents

- [Tokyo 2022](#tokyo-2022)
  - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [TL;DR: How is Japan?](#tldr-how-is-japan)
  - [Transportation](#transportation)
    - [Walking](#walking)
      - [Rules](#rules)
    - [Trains](#trains)
  - [Climate](#climate)
    - [Summer](#summer)

## TL;DR: How is Japan?

Hot.

## Transportation

### Walking

You will inevitably have to walk sometimes, even in the city. Oftentimes much
farther than you might expect. It is not uncommon to walk into a train station
and see signs pointing in the direction of whatever line you intend to board
with distances in hundreds of meters. In fact, that's the better option. If
you're unlucky, you got in via the wrong entrance, and you'll have to walk back
out, cross the street and walk to its opposite end to find the correct entrance.

Most definitely always keep in mind that it is perfectly legal and extremely
common to ride a bike on a sidewalk. In fact, much more so than on a regular
road for cars. You should always assume there may be a bike about to speed past
you from either side, so always take a glance behind yourself to make sure you
don't collide when making sudden sideways motion or when stopping to take a look
at a map, only to realize you've been going in the wrong direction for the past
10 minutes. People ride their bikes rather fast, and almost always without a
helmet, so these encounters can be quite dangerous.

#### Rules

If there are arrows showing you on which side of the stairs/sidewalk/etc. you
should be walking, obey them. Otherwise, someone with a phone in their hands
will inevitably run into you before you know it. You will see countless people
ignoring these signs, but please resist the temptation, especially during busy
hours.

Sidewalks are sometimes separated into a bike lane and a pedestrian lane (much
like in some European cities), which should also be obeyed. However, much like
in European cities, you will likely find that most people ignore this sidewalk
separation.

If there is no sidewalk, you should walk on the right sight of the road (same as
in Europe, against the incoming traffic, just with the sides swapped), but it
usually doesn't matter, so if the left side is more convenient, it should not
generally be an issue.

A red light is a red light. Stay strong and resist the urge to cross even though
you see no cars around, unless you're in an absolute state of hurry. In spite of
what you might have heard from ancient legends, Japanese people commonly cross
the street on a red light, without much hesitation, even if you're not in a
hurry, especially in the unbearable summer heat. It is a sign of the greatest
mental strength and integrity to wait for a green light in the scorching heat of
the Japanese summer sunlight. Then again, many red lights last so long that it's
simply not worth it, and your mental integrity crumbles.

In the Tokyo area, you stand on the left side of an elevator and walk on the
right side. Beware that the sides change depending on the region. Generally
speaking, you should be always able to tell fairly quickly and it is very rare
to see people standing on the wrong side, in the way of other people desperately
trying to run up the escalator.

Outside of car roads, escalators and train station stairways with directional
signs, there are no rules as to which side you should be walking on. While most
people agree that you should walk on the same side of a sidewalk as cars drive
on the road (which would be left in Japan), nobody seems to follow this rule in
the slightest in Japan. The sidewalks are usually quite wide, yet you will often
have trouble to walk between a crowd coming in the opposite direction. This is
also true for most train station hallways, as well as any other hallways (in
convenience stores, shopping malls, government buildings, etc.).

At last, the most important rule: **Dodge other people.** Why? Because most
people, especially locals on their way to/from work, don't follow these rules.
They are simply too busy playing primitive games on their phones to notice you,
and they will run into you all the time if you don't pay enough attention.

### Trains

Having lived in Europe for over two decades, it hardly surprises me when a
2-hour train has a 3-hour delay. It is equally unsurprising to experience
countless other train-related problems. And then there's the absolutely
mind-boggling speed of trains in eastern Europe, which hardly ever exceed 100
km/h, even if the stops are tens of kilometres apart. Well, as you certainly
already know, you need not worry about any of these issues. There is an
occasional "human accident" or "person injury", which I'll rather not go into
too much detail about, but it is very rare that these should delay your commute.

If you're using Google Maps, or a similar navigation application, to find your
way around Japan, then always note a couple of things:

- To find the train you're supposed to get on, always remember the train line
  colour, name, direction and the platform number (not to be confused with the
  train station number). That way, you will avoid getting onto the wrong train
  line or, more annoying, boarding a train in the wrong direction.
- Sometimes the name and the colour of the line doesn't actually match what you
  see in the Google Maps route plan. For example, what appears on Google Maps as
  a purple 上野東京ライン [ueno-tokyo line], is actually an orange 東海道線
  [toukaidou line] on virtually all signs and train schedule boards at the
  actual train stations. Therefore, you sometimes have to proceed with extra
  caution and spend a bit of extra time on reading the fine print on some train
  station signs to figure out what train you're actually supposed to take.

Making unnecessary noise, such as notification sounds on your phone or phone
calls in general, is considered inappropriate on Japanese trains, and to a
lesser extent in train stations. You will see sings telling you to use マナー
モード (literally "manner more", which is for some the way they refer to a
vibration/silent mode on your phone) when you're on a train, and you are almost
guaranteed to get some looks of disapproval should you decide to break this rule
and dare make a loud phone call on a train (see Top Gear S11E04 for reference).

If you have the mental image of businessmen sitting on a train with newspapers
in their hands, you're not too far from the truth. The only difference is that
newspapers have been replaced by smartphones, and not just on the trains.
Anywhere you walk, you will see locals staring into their phones, but it is
especially apparent on the trains. Some of them may be reading the news or
checking the weather, but most of them, regardless of age, will be playing the
most simple, mindless games imaginable. You can also notice this in restaurants,
when waiting for their food, or basically anywhere else they need to kill some
time. This probably sounds quite innocent and unremarkable, but it is one of
those uncanny things you have to see to understand the scale. Let me just say
it's enough of a problem for many train stations to have announcements every
couple of minutes, telling passengers to stop staring into their phones, so that
people stop running into each other because no one is actually paying attention
to their surroundings.

## Climate

### Summer

Frankly, no words can quite describe just how hot it is. The numbers alone do
the Japanese summer no justice at all. Even 30°C can feel like an absolute hell
if you're standing in the sun in front of a crossing for what feels like
centuries (even though it's usually just a minute or two). Once the air
temperature gets past 35°C (which happens from around 10 AM until about 4 PM on
most summer days), prolonged stay outside changes from uncomfortable to a
literal health hazard.

It gets hot in many places in the world, but the humidity turns the oven up a
couple of notches. I have visited north Africa a couple of times before, but the
air is usually dry, so even though the temperature is technically higher, it
does not feel nearly as hot. In Japan, you can actually see the air humidity
reach 100%, with >90% being a common occurrence on most summer mornings. Let's
just say... you quickly notice that the moment you leave your room and enter the
streets of a densely populated city.

The most crucial step before setting a foot outside is to have packed something
to drink. You can find an inexpensive beverage vending machine on every corner
of Tokyo, as well as most other larger cities in Japan, so make sure you never
become thirsty. If you walk around in direct sunlight, you will sweat a lot.
Don't get me wrong, you will sweat even if you stand still in the shade, thanks
to the glorious humidity and consistently high air temperature, but it will be a
lot worse than you might even realize at the time if you're unlucky enough to
have to walk somewhere on foot in the streets of Tokyo around noon.

To better illustrate my point, it is not uncommon to drink about a litre of
water per hour of walking, and you can do this for quite a few hours without
ever even starting to think of having to visit a toilet to let go of said water.
The water has to be going somewhere, and the only logical conclusion is that
your body is desperately using it to cool itself as much as possible. This is
why staying hydrated should always be at the top of your priorities.

The sunlight itself is also surprisingly strong, so you might want to put on
some sun protection. Most locals choose protect themselves using clothes and
parasols. This is especially true for women, commonly found wearing long sleeves
and various hats to block the sunlight. Men don't seem to be particularly
worried by the concept of skin damage, so aside from the usually business suits,
there is rarely anything protecting their skin. You can find protective creams
at all kinds of stores, virtually always marketed towards women as cosmetic
products, but I doubt their potency depends on the user's gender.
